Kharkiv,[a] also known as Kharkov,[b]  is the second-largest city in Ukraine.[7] Located in the northeast of the country, it is the largest city of the historic region of Sloboda Ukraine. Kharkiv is the administrative centre of Kharkiv Oblast and Kharkiv Raion. It had a population, before the Russian invasion, of 1,421,125 (2022 estimate).[8]

Kharkiv was founded in 1654 as a fortress of the Tsardom; following the transformation into the Russian Empire Kharkiv grew to become a major centre of industry, trade, and Ukrainian culture in Sloboda Ukraine. At the beginning of the 20th century the city had a predominantly Russian population, but as industrial expansion drew in further labor from the distressed countryside, and as the early Soviet regime moderated previous restrictions on Ukrainian cultural expression, Ukrainian became the largest recorded ethnicity. From December 1919 to January 1934, Kharkiv was the capital of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.

Kharkiv is a major cultural, scientific, educational, transport, and industrial centre of Ukraine, with numerous museums, theatres, and libraries, including the Annunciation and Dormition cathedrals, the Derzhprom building in Freedom Square, and the National University of Kharkiv. Industry plays a significant role in Kharkiv's economy, specialised primarily in machinery and electronics. There are hundreds of industrial facilities throughout the city, including the Morozov Design Bureau, the Malyshev Factory, Khartron, Turboatom, and Antonov.

In March and April 2014 security forces and counter-demonstrators defeated efforts by Russian-backed separatists to seize control of the city and regional administration. Kharkiv was a major target for Russian forces in the eastern Ukraine campaign during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine before they were pushed back to the Russia–Ukraine border. The city remains under intermittent Russian fire, with reports that almost a quarter of the city was destroyed by April 2024.[9][10][11]