Literature in the Manx language, which shares common linguistic and cultural roots with the Gaelic literature and Pre-Christian Celtic mythology of Ireland and Scotland, is known from at least the early 16th century, when the majority of the population still belonged to the Catholic Church in the Isle of Man. Even so, Manx orthography departs so radically from Irish or Scottish Gaelic orthography that it is all but illegible to literate native speakers of both languages.[1]

Early works were often religious in theme, including translations of the Book of Common Prayer, the Bible, and original Anglican and Methodist hymns. Even though his allegedly chronic drinking and womanising caused considerable trouble with his superiors in the Church of England Diocese of Sodor and Man, Rev. Dr. Thomas Christian's literary translation and adaptation of Milton's Paradise Lost and his extant works of original poetry are considered masterpieces of the Manx literary language. Long after his death, many Manx people were reportedly able to quote long passages of Rev. Christian's poetry from memory.[2][3]

After being discovered during the Victorian era by Anglo-German Celticist Charles Roeder, Cregneash fisherman and story-teller Edward Faragher (Manx: Ned Beg Hom Ruy); (1831–1908), published original poetry, stories, and literary translations, for which he is widely considered the last native speaker of Manx to become a major writer in the language.[4] The historian A. W. Moore also collected many traditional Manx-language songs and ballads in publications towards the end of the 19th century.

Yn Çheshaght Ghailckagh, the Manx Language Society, was founded at the end of the 19th century. The recent revival of Manx, the creation of the Eisteddfod-inspired Cooish literary and cultural festival, and the rise of Manx-medium education beginning with the Bunscoill Ghaelgagh has resulted in new original works and translations being published in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, with particularly important authors including Brian Stowell (1936–2019), Colin Jerry (1936-2008), and Robert Corteen Carswell (born 1950).